TOTAL ANNIHILATION: BATTLE TACTICS
READ ME


CONTENTS:
* System Requirements
* Installation
* Version Compatibility
* New Features
* New Units
* New Maps
* Technical Support
* Contacting Cavedog Entertainment
* Credits



SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
Total Annihilation: Battle Tactics (TA:BT) requires the full version of Total Annihilation as well as the following hardware specifications:

	Windows 95
	Pentium 100MHz/133 MHz recommended
	32MB RAM
	4x CD-ROM
	Sound Blaster compatible audio system
	VGA 256 color or better
	Mouse



INSTALLATION
In order to play any component of TA:BT you must install the "Battle Tactics" component onto your computer.  TA:BT will not read information directly from the CD-ROM.  For example, if you want to use a multiplayer map included on the TA:BT disc, you must first install the TA:BT multiplayer map data to your hard drive.

To install TA:BT, insert the disc into your CD-ROM drive.  Make sure the full version of Total Annihilation is already installed on your machine.  The TA:BT installation will not continue until the full version of the game is installed.  If Autoplay is enabled an installation screen will appear a few moments after inserting the disc.  Follow the directions as prompted by the install program.  The installer will automatically find the appropriate Total Annihilation directory so there is no need to specify a path.  

If Autoplay is disabled, use Windows Explorer or the "My Computer" icon to locate the installation executable, called Setup.exe, on your CD-ROM drive.  Double-clicking Setup.exe will launch the install program.

New Multiplayer and Skirmish maps will appear in their respective Select Map screens.


VERSION COMPATIBILITY
TA:BT utilizes the Version 3.0a engine, which incorporates all features from v3.0, as well as exciting new features.  Due to the nature of these enhancements, saved games from versions prior to v3.0 will not be compatible.  In addition, players with TA:BT installed can only play multiplayer games against other players with either TA:BT or v3.0 installed.

In order to ensure proper game operation, previous versions of the game should not be installed over TA:BT.  This includes all patches and The Core Contingency.

NEW FEATURES
* New Campaign will now allow you to select any mission at any time.
* New panoramas for Acid, Crystal, and Urban worlds.


NEW UNITS
(DL) = previously available as a download unit

ARM UNITS


ARM KBOTS:

Marky (DL)
The Arm's radar technology gains mobility with this Tech Level 2 Kbot.

Warrior (DL)
A rugged medium infantry Kbot with both an EMG gun and a cannon.

Shooter (DL)
Long range, big gunned, level 2 K-bot.


ARM VEHICLES:

Penetrator (DL)
The Annihilator cannon mounted on a maneuverable tank.

Phalanx
Mobile flak cannon.


ARM AIRCRAFT:

Eagle (DL)
Medium-range radar takes flight with this Tech Level 2 aircraft.


ARM HOVERCRAFT:

Anaconda
Tank combat is no longer confined to the ground.  This hovertank can travel over most terrain to inflict damage with its light gauss cannon.

Bear 
This transport can carry up to 6 units over land and sea.

Construction Hovercraft
Builds Level 1 and 2 fortifications and the Hovercraft Platform.

Skimmer
A quick and responsive hovercraft best used for scouting out unfamiliar terrain.  It is armed with a light laser.

Swatter 
Keep attacking aircraft away from your base with the Swatter, a missile-wielding, anti-air hovercraft.

Wombat
This rocket-launching hovercraft can attack enemies from a distance with its heavy rockets.


ARM FORTIFICATIONS:

Defender NS (DL)
The marine version of the land-based missile tower.  A superior defense against aircraft.

Flakker (DL)
Designed to take down aircraft individually or in large, attacking groups.

Fortification Wall (DL)
A Tech Level 2 version of Dragon's Teeth.  The Fortification Wall adds height to protect against projectile fire.

Stingray (DL)
A floating heavy laser tower effective against attacking fleets.

Stunner
A silo that delivers a strong electro-magnetic missile that will only effect CORE units.



ARM CONSTRUCTION BUILDINGS:

Hovercraft Platform
Built by land-based Tech Level 2 construction units, this factory can make variety of hover units.



ARM OTHER BUILDINGS:

Metal Maker NS (DL)
A floating version of the land-based unit that uses stored energy and converts it into metal.

Cloakable Fusion Plant (DL)
This advanced energy source uses some of its production to hide from your enemy.  Cloaking abilities can be turned on and off.

Moho Metal Maker (DL)
This energy-to-metal converter works best when fueled by a fusion plant.



CORE UNITS

CORE KBOTS:

Dominator (DL)
A Tech Level 2 Kbot equipped with two rocket launchers with a wide blast radius.

Sumo (DL)
The slow and steady Sumo fires two heavy lasers from the protection of its heavy armor.

Voyeur (DL)
Although it has no weaponry, the Voyeur's mobile radar capabilities make it an essential member of the Core land army.


CORE VEHICLES:

Leveler (DL)
Let the Leveler's heavy cannon take care of an onslaught of enemy ground troops in just a few shots.  This riot tank is excellent at dispersing crowds.

Copperhead
Mobile flak cannon.



CORE SHIPS:

Phantom (DL)
This radar-jamming ship can patrol your water base and hide it from enemy detection.



CORE HOVERCRAFT:

Construction Hovercraft
Builds Level 1 and 2 fortifications and the Hovercraft Platform.

Nixer
Launch rockets while skimming across the land or sea with this Tech Level 2 hovertank.

Scrubber
The Scrubber easily navigates many types of terrain to scout out the enemy's territory.

Slinger
While hovering over the water or rocky turf, the Slinger's anti-air missiles keep attacking aircraft at a distance.

Snapper
This medium-sized hovertank and its plasma cannon are a menace to attacking enemy units.

Turtle
Move all kinds of units over the terrain in the Turtle hovercraft transport.  The Turtle is unarmed and can carry 8 units.


CORE FORTIFICATIONS:

Cobra (DL)
An anti-air flak gun that shoots artillery shells at high speeds.  It is most damaging against groups of aircraft.

Stinger (DL)
A rotating turret missile tower that floats.

Thunderbolt (DL)
Although vulnerable to submarine torpedoes, this floating version of the Core's heavy laser tower easily destroys attacking ships and nearby enemy land units.

Toaster (DL)
The Toaster will automatically engage the enemy and then return to its heavily-armored protective shell underground, strong enough to survive a nuclear attack.

Neutron
A silo that delivers a neutron missile, does not effect structures or CORE units.


CORE CONSTRUCTION BUILDINGS:

Hovercraft Platform
Land-based construction units can build this hovercraft factory.


CORE OTHER BUILDINGS:

Floating Metal Maker (DL)
A floating, unarmed unit that converts energy into metal.


NEW MAPS

Aqua Verdigris
12 X 12 Acid map with Dragon's Teeth fortifications.

Brilliant Cut Lake
15 X 15 A beautiful lagoon of crystal.

Canal Crossing
16 X 17 Four equally sized beaches; battle at the crossing of two rivers.

Coremageddon
13 X 20 A maze of metal walls; great for ambushing enemy troops.

Metal Gridlock
20 X 20 Five squares interlock to create defensive forts.

Wretched Ridges
12 X 12 High ridges protect defensive areas, lightly forested.




Technical Support (U.S. & Canada)

Assistance Via World Wide Web
Get up-to-the-minute technical information at the Cavedog Entertainment web-site, at: http://www.cavedog.com  twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.  Through this site you'll have access to our FAQ documents, (Frequently Asked Questions) which contain our latest troubleshooting information.  

You'll have access to our FTP (File Transfer Protocol) area where you can download patches and new enhancements as soon as they become available, and an E-Mail area where you can leave us your tech support problems and questions if you do not find your answers through the FAQ information supplied at the web address above.
 
Help Via Telephone/Fax Or Mail In The United States & Canada
For phone assistance, call Cavedog Entertainment's Tech Support at 425-398-3063. We have an Interactive Voice Response and Faxback system that is available twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. If you should need live support, we are available Monday through Friday, 7:30 AM until 7:30 PM (PST).  Please note that live Tech Support may be closed on major holidays.  We ask that you do the following when calling: be at your computer; have your system information ready for our technicians including system make and model; RAM; video and sound card data and drivers; and any screen or error messages you've encountered and where (if not currently displayed on your screen). It will expedite your handling significantly.  You may also fax in your Technical Support questions or problems to: (425) 806-0480, or write in your questions to the address below.

Product Return Procedures In The United States & Canada 
In the event our technicians at 425-398-3063 determine that you will need to forward materials directly to us, please include a brief letter explaining what is enclosed and why.  Make sure you include the Return Merchandise Authorization Number (RMA#) supplied you by the technician and your telephone number in case we need to call you.  Any materials not containing this RMA# will be returned to you unprocessed.  Your mail should be sent to the following address:  

Cavedog Entertainment
13110  NE 177th Place
Suite # B101, Box180
Woodinville, WA  98072-9965
Attn:  Technical Support
RMA#: (include your RMA# here)

Warranty Policy In The United States & Canada 
If our technicians determine that the product storage medium is found to be defective within ninety (90) days of original purchase, (unless otherwise provided by applicable law), Cavedog Entertainment will replace the item free of charge, to the original purchaser, if the item is accompanied by the original dated receipt and packaging.  If you do not have the original receipt, or if the warranty period has expired, Cavedog Entertainment will replace the product storage medium for a nominal fee.

If your product information contains Technical Support phone numbers for Europe, you must contact those phone numbers and abide by their warranty policies. 

Technical Support (Europe)

Help Via Telephone In Europe

Technical Assistance: English speaking customers call 01923 209145

Assistance Technique: Remarque: Notre service de soutien technique se trouve en Angleterre. Clients  francophones appelez le 00 44 1923 209148

Technischer Kundendienst: Beachten Sie bitte dass sich unser technischer Kundendienst in England befindet. Den deutschsprachigen Kundendienst erreichen Sie unter folgender Nummer: 00 44 1923 209151

Ordering Our Products

If you'd like to order our products and merchandise or want to check on a previous order, please call our Order Dept at 888-477-9369. If you're unable to dial an 800#, please call 425-867-2597. You may also fax your order to 425-489-3446.  Webslingers can order through http://www.cavedog.com.

Other
Please do not make unauthorized copies.  The program you've purchased was produced through the efforts of many people who earn their livelihood from its lawful use. Don't make copies for others who have not paid for the right to use it. To report copyright violations to the Software Publishers Association, call 1-800-388-PIR8 or write:
Software Publishers Association
1101 Connecticut Ave., Suite 901
NW Washington, DC 20036


CREDITS

Design
Richard W. Smith

Producer
Kellyn Beeck

Assistant Producers
Steve Kuo
Garrett Link

Map and Mission Creation
Torrey Froese
Richard W. Smith
Ian Fox
Pasha Smith
Garrett Link (Coremageddon)

Localization Coordinator
Ingrid Berendt

Test Lead
Ruth A. Lopez

Testers
Eric Elders
Shannon Hill
Brad Lyons
Bryan Macdonald
Joe Mullenix
Randy Ochs
Eric Snyder
Jason "Crash" Stiney
Casey Stein
TJ Wright

Playtesters
Dave Einstein
Eddie Blake

Thanks To
Steve Perrot
Travis Grey
Jacob McMahon
Bob Wilson



This program is protected by United States federal and international copyright laws.

All trademarks mentioned in this document are the property of their respective owners.

Copyright 1998 Humongous Entertainment, Inc.


