TOTAL ANNIHILATION READ ME
DOWNLOADABLE UNIT - CORE NECRO

CORE NECRO - UNIT DESCRIPTION
For 376 metal and 10164 energy, this level 2 Kbot has the power to bring units back from the dead!  Just select a corpse and the Necro will ressurect it, then heal it to full health.  Sophisticated radar-invisibility technology allows the Necro to get deep behind enemy lines to bring back dead enemy units as well.

INSTALLING THE NEW UNIT
After downloading the new unit, double-click to extract
the unit file.  The unit file (unitname.UFO) will be
placed in the c:\cavedog\Totala folder unless otherwise 
specified.  The unit file must be located in the same 
directory as Totala.exe.  After the unit is installed, 
it will appear on the appropriate build menus the next time 
the game is launched.

**You must have Total Annihilation version 1.2 BETA 1 or 
greater in order to use a downloaded unit.  You can download
the most recent patch for Total Annihilation from 
www.totalannihilation.com.**

USING THE NEW UNIT
After having installed v1.2 BETA 1 or greater as well as the 
new unit file, the downloaded unit will be available on the 
build menus in Skirmish and Multiplayer mode.  The new unit 
will not be available while playing missions.

When using the new unit in a multi-player game, all players
must have the downloaded unit installed.  If one player
does not have the new unit available to them, none of the 
players will be able to use the new unit for that 
multi-player game.



LEGAL INFORMATION

Copyright*1997 Humongous Entertainment.

You may use, copy and distribute (by web download of the 
unmodified zipped file only) this program only if you:

(1) include this notice on any copy and don't charge for 
any copy or distribution

(2) do not reverse engineer (except to the extent such 
cannot be prohibited)

(3) agree that this program is provided on an "as is", 
no warranty basis and 

(4) agree that Humongous Entertainment has no liability 
(because the program is provided without charge).






